This is Monte Vido, the capital and
largest city of Uruguay. It's not just
the largest metro area, it's home to 56%
of the nation's population. It's also 19
times larger than the next largest city,
Sto. It's clear that Monte Vido is the
economic and cultural center of Uruguay,
something urban geographers call a
primate city. Monte Vido is just one
such city on this planet. Ulan Batar is
43% of Mongolia's population and 15
times larger than the country's next
largest city. San Jose is 42% of Costa
Rica's population and 37 times larger
than the country's next largest city.
Reevic is 54% of Iceland's population
and 12 times larger than that country's
next largest city. You get the idea.
Across continents, there are countries
that are often defined by its major
city. Why does some countries have these
primate cities while others like the US,
Australia, India, Canada, the
Netherlands, and China do not? And are
these primate cities better than the
rest? Let's answer those questions after
the bike bell.
[bell]
This video is sort of an opposite of the
geography videos you may have seen on
YouTube. The ones that ask you, why does
nobody live here? I think that's a
really clever framing to talk about
human geography, but I can't help
thinking about the opposite question.
Why does seemingly everyone in some
countries live in the capital city? Why
not spread out more evenly? I'm
definitely not the first person to ask
this question. The first person to ask
this question and then write about it
was a geographer named Mark Jefferson.
He was teaching at Eastern Michigan
University in Ipsellante and started
publishing papers on cities, his first
in 1907. He would make a career out of
trying to understand the relationship
between people, cities, and economies.
But perhaps his most impactful paper was
called the law of the primate city. He
wondered why some countries had cities
that dwarfed all other cities in its
boundaries. The question percolated
throughout his career. He spent much of
his time traveling around the world in
an era before the internet and access to
reliable comparable population
statistics. He had to gather them as he
traveled and later call cities one by
one to assemble the data for his journal
article. There was no UN population
statistics to refer to because there was
no UN back then. He reported his
population statistics in a unique way.
Let's look at Austria, the most extreme
example he found back in 1939. For each
country, the primate city was given the
number 100, which in this case was
Vienna. The next two largest cities were
given numbers corresponding to their
percentage of their population relative
to the primate city. So Gratz is 8 and
Lintz is six. They were only 8% and 6%
of the population of Vienna
respectively. In this way, every
nation's primate city metric could be
reported as those three numbers. Denmark
at the time was second with a score of
1119.
Hungary was next with 11312 and the UK
was fourth with 11413.
Unsurprisingly for the era, Europe got a
lot of coverage in his analysis. But he
did calculations for Asian nations like
China, which was more evenly distributed
with 14437.
Japan was also flattered with 15116.
India clocked in with a very flat 17944.
For my US audience, it was also pretty
flat back then with 14327. Though,
interestingly, the three largest cities
at the time were New York, Chicago, and
Philly. Once Jefferson had this
information, he wanted to know why some
countries had primate cities while
others like India and the US did not, at
least not at the extreme of Austria and
Denmark. Here he doesn't really provide
a satisfying hypothesis. He mentions
nationalism in nations, which does make
some sense. If you're an ambitious kid
born in rural Austria, you're going to
try to make your fortune in Vienna.
You're not going to try to move to
London. There's no friction in you
moving to Vienna. Whereas you'd have to
immigrate to the UK to move to London.
countries with significant rural to
urban migration that have cities that
act as major cultural and economic
magnets generate primate cities. Now,
this is a little bit simplistic, which
of course means that his paper has
inspired geographers for generations to
improve upon his data and propose new
hypotheses. We'll get to those in a
second. Jefferson is also interested in
countries that had no primate city at
all. Why was that the case? He brings up
two examples, Spain and Italy. He
believes Spain to be two countries stuck
together. The Castellian side with
Madrid and the Catalan side with
Barcelona. Each city would attract their
own rural migrants, hence the 1913
split. Italy is sort of the same story.
The country only fully reunified in
1870, only 69 years before the paper was
published. Prior to reunification, it
was several different kingdoms with
their own capitals and economies. That's
why in 1939, their primate number was
1967.
the least primate country he analyzed.
Okay, so that was 1939. What about
today? Now we have much better
statistics and we're able to look at all
countries, not just the 50 that that one
geographer wanted to look at. These
days, urban geographers don't use the
same 100 number split Jefferson used.
There are various ways to calculate
primacy, but a basic one takes the
largest city population and divides it
by the combined population of the next
two largest cities. That gives us one
clean number, making direct comparisons
easier to do. There's actually an even
easier way, which is just to create a
ratio between the population of the most
populous city and the second most
populous city. No need to calculate a
third city. This is how Wikipedia does
it. And while it's probably not as good
as the three city model, I'm going to
use it so everyone watching can go and
see their country's primate number on
the Wikipedia page for primate cities.
It beats me trying to calculate report
every single country in this video. You
might be thinking that Wikipedia
probably doesn't have the best data on
city populations. And you'd be right.
But the dirty secret of urban geography
is that it's actually really hard to
compare cities across nations because
every nation does it differently. One of
the best websites for getting urban
population data is city population.
I recommend checking it out. But the web
master even says that population
statistics are all of varying and some
of suspect accuracy. So let's just use
Wikipedia and move on with our lives.
All right. Sri Lanka has the most
distinct primate city with Columbbo
being 45 times larger than the next
largest city, Candi. Costa Rica is
second with San Jose being 37 times
larger than Porto Lemon. Barbados is
essentially tied with a primate number
of 37 as well. What do these cities have
in common? Well, first of all, they're
small. Barbados is one-third the size of
the five burrows of New York. It's
easier for small countries to develop a
primate city as there's unlikely to be a
second location appropriate for a major
city, nor an economy that could support
a second major city. Large countries
like Russia, Canada, the US, Brazil, and
China have some of the lowest scores. A
2009 study found a few additional
commonalities some countries with
primate cities share. One category
identified is middle inome Latin
American countries with a colonial past.
They identify Argentina, Chile, Cuba,
Costa Rica, Haiti, Jamaica, Nicaragua,
Surinom, Uruguay, and Peru. There are
actually others in this range on the
Wikipedia list, but this study used a
three city calculation, and it's from
2009. Things change. Urban primacy was
initiated and enforced by colonizers who
used the major cities as logistical hubs
for transporting goods back to Europe.
The administrative capital was located
in the same city, as were all the local
elites. After independence, local elites
maintained the status of the primate
city. Urban primacy was the physical
embodiment of consolidated power and
wealth, whereas the rural countryside
was poor and powerless. Light American
primacy has decreased over time as this
dynamic has eased somewhat. Argentina,
Peru, and Uruguay saw declines in their
primate numbers. Colombia is an example
of a country without a primate city.
Bogotaa is still the biggest, most
important city, but Medigene is large
and growing as well. Primate cities are
common on the African continent
historically due to colonialism in much
the same way as Latin America. The
trends here are more mixed, however.
Urbanization is happening rapidly across
the entire continent and Africa will
soon be home to many of the world's
largest cities. In some countries like
Nigeria, that will only increase primacy
there. While in countries with multiple
large cities, their primate numbers will
go down. Moving over to Europe, Armenia,
Georgia, Latvia, and Serbia are
considered newer primates as they were
once part of the former USSR and
Yugoslavia. Now separate independent
entities, their principal cities are now
primate cities. There are some old
primates out there too, like Budapest
for Hungary and Vienna for Austria.
Still big from their histories as
centers of old empires. Primacy can also
exist within subnational divisions. For
example, Colorado has a primate number
of 3.9 because the Denver metro area is
so much bigger than the Colorado Springs
metro area. States with high primate
numbers may be dominated politically by
those cities. For example, it's pretty
common to hear residents of rural
Illinois complain about Chicago's
influence on the state's affairs. The
journal article I've been using for this
section of the video is called Urban
Primacy: Reopening the Debate, which is
a great title and also points to the
lack of consensus on this topic. It's
not easy to draw causal connections
between economic growth and population
growth, as well as migration patterns.
You might be able to tell a compelling
story for one country or group of
similar countries, but that theory
doesn't work worldwide. I'd also like to
point out that understanding primate
cities doesn't really do much for city
planners working on the ground in those
cities. It may be important to
understand local economic growth and
rural urban migration patterns, but
primate city theory isn't really useful
for predicting trends or shaping policy.
What I think it is useful for is guiding
our thinking about the role cities play
in the economic and cultural lives of
the people within nations. Cities
generate wealth and culture and that
concentration of wealth and culture
could be good, but it can also promote
inequities. So, the answer to the
question, why does everyone live here is
it's complicated. It's fun thinking
about the flows and concentrations of
humans on this planet, but it's critical
that we think about the flows and
concentrations of wildlife on this
planet, too. Because right now, those
flows are breaking down and we're
running out of time to fix it. That's
why I'm a Planet Wild member and why I
think you should consider becoming one,
too. Planet Wild has this really cool
model for nature protection. Every
month, they partner with a conservation
organization to complete a specific
conservation project. We, as a
community, contribute to Planet Wild
monthly or yearly, and our contributions
fund that project. Simple, right? And
the coolest thing is that you get to
stay connected to the project because
Planet Wild creates YouTube videos and
reports that tell you exactly what they
helped achieve. When you join Planet
Wild, you'll be met with so many
different projects that Planet Wild is
engaged in, and some of them are just
amazing. I'm a big fan of fungi, and I
was excited to see that Planet Wild is
supporting an effort by the Fungi
Foundation to have the United Nations
recognize fungi alongside
by the UN Convention.
>> This project is great because it's not
just about preserving habitat for big
photogenic mammal, but creating a policy
change for an overlooked branch in
nature. And you think that a video from
Planet Wild about fungi on YouTube would
be less exciting than something with
like lions or whales in them, but you'd
be wrong because it was a really high
quality, engaging video filled with
interesting information. If you watch
it, you'll be learning things about
fungi that you never knew that you
needed to know. If fungi isn't your
thing, they have so many other projects.
Things like rewing power line corridors
in Switzerland and creating an
underground sculpture garden in the
Mediterranean to stop trwers from over
fishing with their nets. I don't know. I
guess I'm really attracted to the
projects that focus on the relationship
between humans and nature and have
creative policy and design responses.
Honestly, my mission with City Beautiful
is to spread policy and design solutions
for cities and Planet Wild is funding
those sorts of solutions in nature. It's
just a good match. If you want to join a
growing community that makes a
difference in nature, consider joining
Planet Wild. You can give whatever
amount, big or small, that feels right
for you. Every dollar or euro or peso or
whatever counts when protecting nature.
And to get you started, I have a gift
for you. The first 100 people to sign up
using my code, beautiful 10, will get
their first month paid for by me. Just
scan this QR code or click on the link
in the description. And the best part,
you'll immediately have an impact in
nature and see the results in less than
30 days here on YouTube. And there's no
catch here. You can cancel anytime. If
you want to see Planet Wild in action,
check out their project on fungi right
here.